
All quality assurance efforts notwithstanding, it has to be assumed
that a software system of Motr's scale and complexity would
experience a range of deployment-time problems. Mechanisms must be put
in place to expedite detection and analysis of such problems. This
document describes mechanisms that in advance record information about
system state that might be useful for analysis of a future problem.

It is convenient to roughly classify such mechanisms according to the
frequency of events that are recorded:

    * "logging" records relatively rare events, of which no more than
      few tens occur during processing of a typical file system
      operation on a node. Examples of events subject to logging are:
      "a fop arrived to a server", "storage IO request took N
      millisecond to complete", "data page was found in the cache",
      "thread creation failed";

    * "tracing" records events at least by an order magnitude more
      frequent: "X bytes of memory were allocated", "lock granted",
      "function FOO returns false".

Events of different frequencies are useful for analysis of different
types of problems. Intuitively, logging tends to be useful for
analysis of higher level problems, like system scalability and its
interaction with environment and user loads, whereas tracing is better
suited for lower level problems like race conditions and control flow
errors. The classification above is only approximate, there is a gray
area between logging and tracing, and investigation of a higher level
problem might often require analysis of a lower level system behaviour
details and vice versa.

It is important to realise that to be useful, logging and tracing must
be active at all times rather than only during "debug runs".

Logging in M0 is based on ADDB (Analysis and Diagnostics Data-Base),
which is a central component of Motr architecture. Details of ADDB
design are described elsewhere. For the purpose of present discussion,
ADDB consists of "records" containing "data-points" pertaining to
execution of system actions. An action form a "context" for
records. For example, ADDB records on a client are generated in a
context of a particular system call (where appropriate). ADDB records
are moved across the network along the edges of a proxy hierarchy
graph and eventually placed on the storage. On a server, ADDB records
are generated in a context of FOP handling, which can be linked back
to the original system call context. This means that ADDB contains
enough information to analyse end-to-end system behavior at the level
of individual file system operations.

ADDB interface is described in addb/addb.h.

Note that all "errors", such as system and library call errors, IO
errors, memory allocation errors are subject to logging.

Tracing interface (lib/trace.h) and implementation are constrained by
the high frequency of traced events. Together with the requirement of
constant tracing this implies that tracing implementation must be very
light-weight. Tracing produces a stream of binary records that require
pre-processing before analysis. This pre-processing needs access to
the exact binary image of an executable that produced the stream
(because tracing records contain pointers). In fact, the
pre-processing is implemented as a special functionality of an
executable: the same executable that produced the trace must be re-ran
with a special command line switch.

A trace survives a large class of fatal errors, including assertion
failures, unexpected process termination, etc. In user space, this is
achieved by placing trace records in a cyclic buffer memory mapped
from a file (or allocated from SysV shared memory).

More detailed information about motr's tracing facilities
(configuration and usage) can be found in doc/trace.



